# 📜 Skv Manifesto

## What’s the big idea?

In 2018, Firefox for Desktop had [45 separate data stores](https://github.com/mozilla/firefox-data-store-docs), in 10 different formats. The exact numbers have changed since then, but the takeaway is the same in 2024: **storing user content and settings for Firefox features is a hard problem!**

Skv is an incremental step toward making it easier to store user data in Firefox. We aim to be the storage interface that Firefox developers reach for first; in between [preferences](https://firefox-source-docs.mozilla.org/modules/libpref/index.html) and SQLite.

Our goal is to provide a key-value storage interface that's:

* **Ergonomic**, with APIs for (1) persisting string keys and simple values: numbers, strings, and binary blobs; (2) reading and deleting ranges of lexicographically sorted keys; and (3) transactions for atomic operations on multiple keys.
* **Dependable,** backed by SQLite—a transactional embedded database that we've used in Firefox and Thunderbird for two decades.
* **Resilient,** automatically backing up store contents, detecting, and recovering from on-disk file corruption; so that a corrupt database doesn't prevent a Firefox feature from working forever.
* **Fast**, with a fully asynchronous API, and a predictable performance profile for more common (read-heavy) workloads.
* **Easy to sync** to a user's other devices via Firefox Sync, for features that would like to do this.

 Our goal isn't to build a novel syncable data storage system in Firefox—though we've learned lots from [past efforts in that space](https://blog.twinql.com/tags/mentat/). We know that some core features will always need a full-featured relational (SQLite) or object (IndexedDB) store, and that's OK! Skv is part of improving our storage story, along with better documentation and guidance for choosing the right store—but it's not the full story.

## Where are we now?

As of November 2024, Firefox offers six generic persistent storage interfaces:

* **Preferences**: `nsIPrefService` / [`libpref`](https://firefox-source-docs.mozilla.org/modules/libpref/index.html), powering `about:config`.
* **SQLite**: `mozIStorageService` / [mozStorage](https://searchfox.org/mozilla-central/source/storage) for C++ consumers;  [`Sqlite.sys.mjs`](https://searchfox.org/mozilla-central/rev/387f3edbef37d31b2e91fb0812c74b54729e86ff/toolkit/modules/Sqlite.sys.mjs) for privileged JavaScript consumers;  [Rusqlite](https://docs.rs/rusqlite/latest/rusqlite/index.html) for Rust consumers.
* **IndexedDB**, a [web API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/IndexedDB_API) that's exposed to [privileged JavaScript code](https://searchfox.org/mozilla-central/rev/387f3edbef37d31b2e91fb0812c74b54729e86ff/toolkit/modules/IndexedDB.sys.mjs) in Firefox, and uses mozStorage under the hood.
* **JSON**: [`JSONFile.sys.mjs`](https://mozilla.github.io/firefox-browser-architecture/text/0012-jsonfile.html); `IOUtils.{read, write}JSON()`.
* **[rkv](https://docs.rs/rkv/latest/rkv/index.html) in ["safe mode"](https://github.com/mozilla/rkv/blob/79da807ee2ebb8808128405cba511d7c9cb057ee/README.md#%EF%B8%8F-warning-%EF%B8%8F)**: `nsIKeyValueService`;  `kvstore.sys.mjs`.
* **Text files**: newline-delimited text; `.ini` (via `nsINIParser`).

## What will we do?

Skv will replace the current (rkv) storage backend for `nsIKeyValueService` and `kvstore.sys.mjs`. We'll migrate all four current rkv consumers—add-ons, Remote Settings, Media Capabilities, and `cert_storage`—to Skv, then remove rkv from Firefox.

Like rkv, Skv will compete with flat file storage (JSON and text); as well as more complex uses of preferences, and simpler uses of SQLite. We aim to find at least two other consumers where Skv could be a better fit, and migrate them.

Six months from now—that's April 2025—we want to confidently tell Firefox feature teams, "if you need to store some user data, reach for Skv first."

## Why is storage hard?

New and experienced Firefox developers often reach for the simplest option that meets their immediate needs, and run into challenges with them later. Some examples of these challenges include:

**Hidden performance implications.** Preferences, JSON storage, and rkv's "safe mode" (1) read their data files entirely into memory—synchronously for preferences; asynchronously for `IOUtils.{read, write}JSON()` and rkv's "safe mode"; either / both for `JSONFile.sys.mjs`— and (2) asynchronously flush the entire contents of memory to disk on write. This can cause sluggishness at startup, and jank during normal use. Frequent writes can cause jank and disk thrashing: session store and Glean—Firefox features which use `IOUtils.{read, write}JSON()` and rkv, respectively—have suffered performance incidents because of this.

**Incorrectly assuming that a storage system is transactional.** SQLite and IndexedDB are the only two transactional storage systems in Firefox. Their transactions are [atomic, consistent, isolated, and durable](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ACID), even in case of a crash or power loss. The other systems are not: dirty in-memory state can be flushed to disk; concurrent reads and writes can see and then flush inconsistent state, partially reverting each others' changes; writes can be lost [even when Firefox is closed normally](https://firefox-source-docs.mozilla.org/toolkit/modules/toolkit_modules/AsyncShutdown.html); and a crash or power loss can lose ostensibly "committed" data, or corrupt or truncate the entire data file.

**Unhandled on-disk file corruption.** Hardware and software driver quality varies widely, especially for consumer-grade PCs, and we've seen [bit flips](bugzilla.mozilla.org/show_bug.cgi?id=1616059) and [I/O errors](https://bugzilla.mozilla.org/buglist.cgi?list_id=17304150&query_format=advanced&f1=OP&f2=OP&f3=short_desc&o3=substring&v3=Database%20disk%20image%20is%20malformed&f5=CP&bug_status=UNCONFIRMED&bug_status=NEW&bug_status=ASSIGNED&bug_status=REOPENED&f6=CP&o4=matches&v4=%22Database%20disk%20image%20is%20malformed%22&f4=content&j2=OR) affect Firefox subsystems. Malware (browser hijackers; malicious add-ons) _and_ well-intentioned tools (system cleaners; anti-virus software) can also corrupt files, or interfere with file reads and writes.

**Lack of syncing.** None of our existing generic storage interfaces integrate easily with Sync, leading Firefox feature teams to ask the Sync team for a one-off integration, or descope multi-device user experiences. A user who customizes their Firefox on one of their devices, then installs Firefox and signs in to Sync on another device, will see their bookmarks, their saved passwords, their recent history, but almost [none of their other customizations](https://bugzilla.mozilla.org/show_bug.cgi?id=syncmore).

### Why is this important?

Taken in isolation, data storage challenges—corruption, lack of syncing, poor performance—might not add up to much more than paper cuts: one-off issues that will occasionally impact some users. But taken together, across all of Firefox, these paper cuts can add up to an experience that feels less than polished.

Reliable storage for user data and settings is the foundation of every customizable Firefox feature. Storage won't be the one thing that makes or breaks a feature, but cracks in the foundation will hurt the user's experience. Forgetting a user's preferences, requiring a user to set all their preferences again, or behaving oddly because a data store was corrupted, are all (avoidable!) sources of frustration.

Today, we don't have good guidance for Firefox feature teams about our different storage systems, and their trade-offs. We want to make our knowledge more accessible, and provide ready-to-use libraries for teams to use. You shouldn’t have to be a storage engineer to have reliable data storage!
